---
layout: page_kz
title:  "My story"
breadcrumb: true
show_meta: false
header: no
categories:
    - projects

---

10th of November 2019

What did you believe in as a kid? Santa Claus? Magic fairies? I believed in a trash can. Whenever something was broken or old my mum would always say "just put it in the trash can". No matter what, it was always the easiest solution. We would take a bag of trash to the big bin behind our apartment building. From there it magically disappeared. Well, I would leave for school at 8 in the morning and get back from work at 10 in the evening, a lot of other things were probably also going on in my neighbourhood without me noticing. It came as a shock when my mum invited me to "go check out that new shopping mall that was built on top of the old landfill". That day I found out about landfills. My trash can content did not disappear by magic after all. It's surprising how old I was when I found out. It just wasn't a topic people talk about.

From the ruins of Soviet Union, through the great economical struggle, by early 2000's we finally arrived at the point where everything we bought came in free plastic bags. My grandmother didn't have to wash our collection of five plastic bags over and over again any more. They didn't drip on me when I was toothbrushing in the bathtub (we didn't have a sink) any more. I remember the day the first McDonald's opened in Latvia. There were a 1000 people protesting in the street. This might not seem much to you, but there were only two million people in the whole country. It was the first restaurant that would serve everything in single use packaging. McDonald's was positive that it is all recyclable, but the reality was that we didn't have any recycling facilities in the country. Neither did we have the money to sort the rubbish and ship the recyclables to another country. Countering the protestors, there were another 1000 people in the street - the biggest queue that has ever been observed in Latvia, all eager to have their first truly Western meal. Soon everyone got used to the extra rubbish that came along with the improvement of the economy, given the bigger picture McDonald's stopped being such a big deal.

As soon as I was 18, I bought my visa and flights to Canada. Rumours had it that Toronto is a paradise where there are jobs, money and freedom. When I landed in Toronto Pearson airport, it was my first time in English speaking country. It was my first time properly alone not knowing anyone on the whole continent, and not really speaking English either. To add to the experience, it was the 28th day of the "garbage strike". The city was swimming in garbage and smelled really bad. A couple of days later the strike ended, the city was cleaned up, I moved into my first ever apartment and life moved on.

Fast forward 10 years to autumn 2019. I've just submitted my PhD thesis about applications of machine learning to genomical data. Living in central London, having a fancy title from a prestigious University College London... I am not going to say I'm lucky, I worked damn hard to get here. Thinking about the hardest times I've been through in these 10 years makes me cry. I wish there would be a time machine for bank transfers, so that I could send a fiver to myself back in the days when I had nothing to eat. So many times I've been stuck in this situation - when you have no cash and less than a fiver on your bank, which means you can neither withdraw cash nor afford anything that can be bought with a card. Those days are long gone. Now that I've finished my PhD, I have to decide what to do with my life. Everyone expects me to get a well paid job. I thought that having a good education is an advantage that will allow me to have more opportunities. Surprisingly, most people think almost the opposite - that having expertise in machine learning and genomics (both are trendy buzz words right now) means that I must find a job in one of these areas and other options are no longer (feasibly) available to me. What I see as my greatest asset, others see as limitation that predefines and limit what I can do with my life. I started looking for jobs and found very interesting positions. I bookmarked them all, but couldn't push myself to apply. Something didn't feel right. 

I gave myself a couple of weeks to sit on my balcony and read about the world. I was reading The Economist, personal blogs of random people and everything in between. Global urbanisation, preventing ecological collapse, improving human lives, sustainable development... All the things I read about seemed more worthwhile of my time than the positions listed on the job boards. I cried.  And then I made a decision to change the world by working on projects that aim to stop plastic pollution of the oceans. Waste management is not the most glamorous career choice, but with plastics production predicted to double in a couple of decades while many regions of the world still don't have even waste collection system, somebody has to act.
